---
Status: 🟥🟨🟩
Title: 
Area: 
Subject: 
tags: 
Deadline: 
Links: 
Exam: 
Exam Date:
---
# Action Items

# Epliepsy

Classification of Epileptic seizures

I> partial (focal, local) 
- simple partial seizures - still conscious, can talk but one limb can move uncontrollably 
- complex partial seizures (not conscious) - more than 1 limb moves uncontrollably 
- partial seizures evolving to secondarily generalized seizures 

II. Generalized (convulsive or nonconvulsive)
- absence seizures (petit mal) (peqeuño mal) - may not know he/she is having a seizure, pupils 
- myoclonic seizures 
- tonic-clonic seizures (grand mal) - tonic: contraction, clonic - relax; alternate 
- tonic seizures - completely relaxed 
- atonic seizures 

III. Unclassified epileptic seizures 

Etiology 
- Although seizures are required for the diagnosis of epilepsy, not all seizures imply epilepsy 
- seizures may occur during many medical or neurologic illnesses, including stress, sleep deprivation, fever, alcohol or drug removal, and syncope 
- seizures can be caused by other things, doesn't mean it's an epileptic patient 
- also, other things can give a secondary diagnosis of epliepsy 

Etiology 
the cause of epilespy is idiopathic in more than half of all the patients
1. vascular abnormalities (cerebrovascular disease)
2. developmental abnormalities (cavernous malformation)
3. intracranial neoplasms (gliomas)
4. head trauma
5. hypoglycemia
6. drug withdrawal 
7. infection, and febrile illness (e.g., meningitis, encephalitis).
8. genetic conditions such as down syndrome 
9. tuberous sclerosis 
10. neurofibromatosis 
11. several genetic abnormalities that result in neuronal channel dysfunction. 

Seizures sometimes can be evoked by specific stimuli.  (trigger) 
approximately 1 of 15 patients reports that seizures occurred after exposure to flickering lights, monotonous sounds, music, or a loud noise. 
- patients with triggers are the ones that are most in control b/c you can normally control the environment 

Pathophysioogy 
- The basic event underlying an eplieptic seizure is...

Clinical manifestations
Aura - Smell, feeling or visual disturbance (may or may not have)
Convulsion - tonic-clonic 
Postictal - recovery (may or may not have postictal stage)

During seizure, patient may not be able to breath and may lead to brain damage due to hypoxia. Consider giving oxygen.  Seizures also use a lot of glucose, equivalent to 2-3 hours in the gym.  So there may be a hypoglycemic state afterwards.  Consider giving orange juice.  

Medical Management
- generic/trade name /mechanism of action 
- phenytoin/ dilantin - blocks sodium channels - gingival hyperplasia 
- carbamezapine/ /tegretol - blocks sodium channels - xerostomia, 
- valproic acid / depakene or depakote - GABA/NMDA receptor / hepatotoxicity 
- clonazepam/klonopin - Augments inhibitory GABAergic system 

Dental Management 
1. Identification of patient by history 
	1. type of seizure 
	2. age at time of onset 
	3. cause of seizures (if known)
	4. medications 
	5. frequency of physician visits (name and phone number)
	6. degree of seizure control 
	7. frequency of seizures 
	8. date of last seizure 
	9. known precipitating factors 
	10. history of seizure-related injuries 
2. Control of the disease - well-controlled deizures - pose no management problems 
3. if questionable history or poorly controlled seizures, consultation with physician before dental treatment - may require modification of drugs 
4. attention to adverse effects of anticonvulsants; these include;
	1. drowsiness
	2. slow movements
	3. ataxia 
	4. etc.
5. possibility of bleeding tendency in patients taking valproic acid (depakene) or carbamazepine (tegretol) as the result of platelet interference - pretreatment tiempo de sangrado, biometria hemática; if grossly abnormal, consultation with physician 
	1. bleeding time is important for this; not really for INR b/c it's for anticoagulants 
	2. consider liver function tests if taking hepatotoxic medication 

Class Activity
- que medicamento tomas? Valproic acid
- cuando fue la ultima vez tuvo convulsiones? 6 meses atras 
- algun estimulo te causa los episodios epilepticos? estres 
- cuando empezo? Que sintomas tiene? 12 años, mooreo, dolor de cabeza
- Cuanto tiempo duro la convulsion? 1 minuto 
- Ha tenido algun episodio eplipetico, durante tx odontologico? No
- En que horarios y dosis toma sus medicamentos? *important to know because patient has better control after taking the drugs 

Cuestionario 
- Paciente refiere diagnostico de epilepsia desde hace 15 años después de una convulsión que se presentó después de un juego de futbol en exposición prolongada al sol, para lo cual toma acido valproico 100mg una tableta cada 24 horas por la mańana desde hace 4 años y no ha tenido cambio de dosis, última crisis fue ..

Fase I 
- preguntar al paciente si ha tomado sus medicamentos adecuadamente incluyendo el día de la consulta 
- evitar citas prolongadas
- solicitar al paciente que acuda con su anticonvulsivo (yes/no)
- evitar exponer al paciente a estímulos estresantes como ruido excesivo; confrontaciones o incomodidad en la consulta evitar estímulos de luz repentinos (gatillo), no prender la lampara de la unidad sobre su rostro y proporcionar lentes obscuros con protector uv al paciente 
- realizar un buen manejo del dolor con anestesia local profunda y adecuada para evitar estímulos dolorosos
- si el paciente presenta algún signo o síntoma de letargo, mareo, ataxia, desorientación o somnolencia valorar posponer la consulta y remitir a revisión médica 

Stroke (cerebrovascular accident or ACV (in spanish))
- stroke is a generic term that is used to refer to a CVA, a serious and often fatal neurologic event caused by sudden interruption of oxygenated blood to the brain 
- this in turn results in focal necrosis of brain tissue and possibly death. even if a storke is not fatal, the survivor can have some debilitating conditions 

epidemiology 
- each year in the united states, about 700,000 people experience new or recurrent stroke 
	- reduced quality of life after due to secondary conditions caused by the stroke 
- this translates to the occurrence of one stroke about every minute, and 75% of persons survive their stroke 

Etiology 
- stroke is caused by the interruption of blood supply and oxygen to the brain as a result of ischemia or hemorrhage. the most common type is ischemic stroke induced by thrombosis (60-80%) 
- 2nd common type is a hemorrhagic type caused by aneurysm 
- risk factor: hypertension - most important risk factor for intracerebral hemorrhagic stroke 
- approximately 10% of persons who have had a myocardial infarction will have a stroke within 6 years 
- additional factors that increase the risk for stroke:
	- a previous stroke 
	- high dietary fat 
	- obesity and elevated blood lipid levels 
	- physical inactivity 
	- uncontrolled hypertension 
	- cardiace abnormalities 
	- diabetes mellitus 
	- heavy tobacco smoking 
	- increasing age (risk doubles each decade after 65 years)
	- periodontal disease 

Pathophysiology 
- cerebral infarctions are most commonly caused by atheroslerotic thrombi or emboli of cardiac origin 
- the extent of an infarction is determined by a site of the occclusion, size of the occluded vessel, duration of th eocclusion, and collateral circulation.  the production and circulation of proinflammatory cytokines, the occurrence of clotting factors, and arterial inflammation contribute to platelet aggregation. 
- the most serious outcome of stroke is death, which occurs in 8% of those who experience ischemic strokes and 38% to 47% of those with hemorrhagic strokes within a month of the event.
- death from stroke may not be immediate (sudden death) but rather may occur hours, days or even weeks after the initial stroke episode. 
- if the victim survives, an excellent chance of having a neurologic deficit or disability of varying degree and duration will remain.  of those who survive sthe stroke, 10% recover with no impairment, 50% have a mild residual disability, 10 to 30% are disabled and need special services.  

Clinical manifestations 
signs of stroke include;
- hemiplegia - distortion in one half or one part of the face 
- temporary loss of speech or trouble in speaking or undestanding speech 
- temporary dimness or loss of vision, particularly in one eye (may be confused with migraine)
- unexplained dizziness 
- unsteadiness or a sudden fall

Escala de cincinnati 
FAST - Face, Arm, Speech, Time 
- raise arms, one arm starts going down, speech - change in speech or not understandable 
- one of these already have 72% of stroke 
Probability of ACV 
1/3 = 72% 
2/3 = 85% 

Epidural (extracranial)/subdural (intracranial) bleeding 
Aneursym - looks like a balloon  

Medical management 
- the first aspect of stroke management is prevention
- this is accomplished by identifying risk factors, (hypertension, diabetes, atherosclerosis, cigarette smoking) and attempting to reduce or eliminate as mnay of these as possible.  

Medical management 
National stroke association 
1. BP control 
2. smoking cessation 
3. determine the existence of atrial fibrillation and treat it 
4. moderate alcohol consumption 
5. cholesterol control 
6. diabetes control 
7. daily exercise 
8. low sodium and low fat food 
9. control of circulatory problems 
10. if the patient has any immediate system, immediate treatment 

Dental management of the patient with stroke 
1. identify risk factors 
2. encourage control of risk factors 
3. obtain thorough history of stroke 
	1. note date of event, current status, medical therapy, and any residual disbailities 
	2. **provide only urgent dental care during first 6 months after a stroke, TIA, or RIND** 
	3. avoid elective care in patient who have had recents TIAs or RINDs 
	4. determine risk for bleeding problems in patients taking anticoagulant drugs and minimize perioperative bleeding 
	(1) Aspirin +/- dipryidamole (Aggrenox), clopidogrel (Plavix), abciximab (ReoPro), or ticlopidine (Ticlid), obtain pretreatment PFA-100 
	(2) Coumarin 
	(3) Heparin (IV)
	(4) use measures that minimize hemorrhage (atraumatic surgery, pressure, gelfoam, sutuiring), as needied 
	(5) have available nonadrenergic hemostatic agents and devices (stents, electrocautery)
4. Short, stress-free, midmorning appointments. Provide (N2O-O2) inhalation as needied 
5. monitor blood pressure and oxygen saturation 
6. Use minimum amount of anesthetic containing vasoconstrictor 
7. avoid epinephrine in retraction cord 
8. recognize signs and symptoms of a stroke, provide emergency care, and activate emergency medical support system 
9. a prior stroke may require assistance for patient to transfer to chair, effective oral evacuation 

Calcifications of the external carotid artery may be identified in the panoramic radiographs 
- do not take pulse on the carotid artery b/c stimulation may break the plaques 

Cuestionario 
- signs symptoms of stroke 
- last time they had stroke 
- doctor checkup 
- control of the disease 
- medications 
- complications 
- control of the risk factors 

Fase I 

Anxiety Disorders 
- anxiety can be purely a psychological experience with few somatic manifestations 
- in contrast, it can present as purely a physical experience with tachycardia, palpitations, chest pain, indigestion headaches, with no psychological distress other than concern about the physical symptoms 
- specifics
	- panic disorders 
	- agoraphobia 
	- phobias 
	- obsessive compulsive disorder*
	- posttraumatic stress disorder 
	- acute stress disorder 
	- generalized anxiety disorder 
	- anxiety disorder due to a general medical condition 
	- substance-induced anxiety disorder 

Etiology 
- no single theory fully explains all anxiety disorders. no single biologic or psychological cause of anxiety has been identified. psychosocial and biologic processes together may best explain anxiety 

Treatment 
psychiatric - medication/lab test 
Psyychology - therapy/ orientation 

Dental Management 
- goals of treatment planning for patients with psychiatric disorders are to maintina oral health, comfort and function, and to prevent and control oral disease 
- susceptibllity to such disease increases because of the adverse effects of xerostomia associated with most of these medications, and the fact that some of the psychiatric conditions for which these patients are being treated reduce interest in or the ability to perform oral hygiene procedures. Also, many of these patients' diets contain foods or drinks that increase the risk for dental disease. 
- the dental team should communicate to the patient and family members a positive, hopeful attitude toward maintenance of the patient's oral health. 
- the dental team should determine whether the patient is legally able to make rational decisions. This should be discuessed with the patient and a loved one. 
- medical consultation is suggested to establish the patient's current status, confirm the medications the patient is taking, identify complications that may be present, and confirm dental medications and doses that minimize dental complications.  

Custionario 
- when did the problem start 
- activities that makes your anxiety worse 
- crisis 
- symptoms 
- time crisis lasted
- any medications necessary
- 





# References

