- [ ] receive passwords for lasalle website + email
- [ ] first week 19th NO ENDO; starts the next Mon 
- [ ] if endo w/ Dr. Ruben 8am; 3 hours
- [ ] patients out of clinic 30 min before 9

# Title
A **Cochrane Systematic Review** Finds No Evidence to Support the Use of Antibiotics for Pain Relief in Irreversible Pulpitis
# Method
Research databases were searched to identify Randomized controlled trials.  Only one study was found that met their inclusion criteria. there were a total of 40 participant

	- participants >18 years old, only one tooth involved, diagnosis of irreversible pulpitis
# Results
**- no significant difference in pain relief for patients with untreated irreversible pulpitis who received antibiotics versus those who did not**

Why is this study important?
BECAUSE LOTS OF DENTISTS STILLLL Prescribe antiobiotics for patients with Irreversible Pulpitis.

Why is prescribing antibiotics for irreverisble pulpitis ineffective?
	- it is an immune system-mediated response related to inflammatory mediatiors that will continue to persist after prescription of antibiotics.

Clinical applications?
- DO NOT prescribe antibiotics to patients with irreversible pulpitis

What can you prescribe for the pain?
-Prescribe NSAIDs until you can see the patient

What do you do when you see the patient? 
- For Emergencies- Access and remove the pulp tissue, place calcium hydroxide
- For Definitive treatment - Root Canal Treatment + Definite restoration












Define and describe features of Irreversible pulpitis 
	- causes
		- dental caries
		- cracked tooth
		- sequel to trauma
	- Treatment for relief of pain

- Why is prescribing antibiotics ineffective?
	- it is an immune system-mediated event related to inflammatory mediatiors; NOT the result of bacterial infection of the pulp.
- why this study is important:
	1) irreversible pulpitis most frequent reason for patients to seek emergency dental care
	2) many dentists continue to prescribe antiobiotics to stop the pain due to irreversible pulpitis
		- 16.67% of endodontists prescribe antibiotics for irreversible pulpitis; perhaps more for GP although there's no study
- Clinical application?  Do not prescribe antibiotics to patients with irreversible pulpitis
	- Discuss how to Diagnose Irrev pulpitis
