provide tx for first time to patients that present:
1) pain
2) traumatic injury
3) acute infection process
4) only 1 procedure!

1. rinse mouth for 1 minute
2. interview
- fill health questionnaire
- identify and document each positive systemic problems
- give medical classification and recording of systemic alerts
3. register the current condition- pain? since when? with what? takingn any meds now for the pain?
4. fill in the ficha de urgencias, attending authorize it and pass to the physical file.  signature in the evolution note.
classify patient asa i, ii, iii etc.
obtain patient signature in evolution note

agregar in registros clinicos de CIRO URGENCIA: 
-ficha de urgencias

1. Receive the patient and ask to rinse with mouthwash for 1 minute.
2. fill health questionnaire. identify and document each positve systmeic problems
3. give medical classification and recording of systemic alerts
4. register current condition
5. fill in emergency record and obtain the patients signature on the evolution note

datos subjetivos del padecimiento - start, how long, always the same pain? or did it increase or decrease after start of symptoms; 
datos objetivos del padecimiento - write what you see clinically; clinicamente, se observa od 16 con caries oclusal profunda y ...
diagnosis - od 16; pulpitis irreversible, 
plan de tratamiento - tratamiento de conductos 
remitir a los departamentos de (refer the patient to department of) - diagnostico
observaciones - other comments

click "prescripcion medica" on the left side
write in detalle the prescription
xrays should be in smile 

after fichas de urgencias
1) Reaching the diagnosis:
- perform your tests - thermal, perc, palpation, ept? 
- discuss the case with doctor and then tell patient the possible tx
- offer tx to patient and do budget in ismile
- sign the consent form, ask the dr for authorization
- send px to caja for payment; and start with indicated treatment
- start your treatment (RCT are the only tx that the student allowed to start and finishe at the Emergency clinic)

add treatment in plan de tratamiento, then select disciplina - px covid-19, then nadd the tratamiento

after you do tx, clean your chair, do  Notas de evolucion; select "urgencia"

cuentas comunida
00800528 - Lms800528

if you want to switch shifts, then you must fill out paperwork from the main office from danise or lorena

even if px says theyre controlled and u put asa 2, after taking bp you put asa3

only bp and heart rate for emergency px