#review
- [ ] Review [Class Case](file:///Users/manalo/Desktop/clinica/class%20case.docx)
- | 1) | Tengo un raigo” (raigo = resto radicular – RF; remaining root | 
	- in dental terms: resto radicular
- Los resultados no corresponden al diagnostico, el paciente presenta periodontitis avanzada.**
- Curación  - means temporary filling like cavit
- (odontograma - only work in hallazgos odontograma not the one that just says "odontograma" on the side )
- empaquetamiento - impacted food

 A. Motivo de consulta
 B. Padecimiento actual (present oral condition)
- no IO Ex.
- sometimes, the location of the tooth is just general b/c the patient doesn't exactly know, but you still write the general location that they mention (lower right back)
- if the patient comes for "a general checkup," you must ask additional questions for the PA
C. Antecedentes Heredo familiares
D. Antecedentes Personales no patológicos )Non pathological personal hx= p paciente femenino de 50 años originario de San Juan Ib los lagos, jaliscos con residencia actual en el rancho "La Wara." Es trabajadora del hogar. Su viviendo no cuenta con agua, luz ni drenaje.  Higiene general deficiente.  Refiere bañarse 1 vez a la semana.  cepillado esporádica, no utiliza hilo ni enjuage bucal, alcoholismo y tabaquismo negados, dieta deficiente. 
- place of origin - just the country
- profession
- housing (residence) - just the city - no needfor the whole address 
- general and oral hygiene
	- ask when px brushes their teeth if just once.  
- habits (alcoholism, smoking, drugs, sports and diet) 
	- diet just the special diets like for anemia (for iron deficiency)
	- smoking - how many sticks
	- sports - imp't for example if they always play on friday night, you'd want to plan to extract on the weekend or Monday.
E. Pathological personal history = medical questionnaire + Drugs interaction
- this is so you have an overview
- easier for you and for other clinicians to check the patient's file
F. Interacciones Farmacologicos
G. Revision de Aparatos y Sistemas (Systems review) 
- UNDIAGNOSED disease: signs and symptoms of  (vertigo, nausea, vomiting)
H. Historia Dental 
- bullet point list of the name of the treatment; no specifics

Extraoral Exam
 - remove lipstick
 a) Skin
	 1) color
	 2) surface - scars, tattoos 
	 3) sensitivity
	 4) elasticity - stiffness, sagging
b) neck
c) TMJ
- lymph nodes
- opening
- deviation
- sounds